# Opening the government of Canada

The preface to Dr. Amanda Clarke’s book, [Opening the Government of Canada](https://www.ubcpress.ca/opening-the-government-of-canada), is an encouraging lens into the federal government’s progress. In the gap between when Dr. Clarke finished writing the book and the final touches before publication, the Government of Canada launched the Canadian Digital Service, digital standards, and most recently, a Digital Academy (which is where I work). And that’s a non-exhaustive list. The pace of change means that some of these initiatives and investments only appear in the preface, and that Dr. Clarke will have to write more books in the future.

She describes the book as somewhat of a history of how the government has reacted (or not) to changing digital technologies, from Wikipedia and GCpedia and the influences of Tim O’Reilly and Beth Simone Noveck towards wiki government to recently worldwide trends in digital government like government digital units and users-first mantras. I’m particularly interested in this book because it’s almost a history of my career, from the GC2.0 tools (GCpedia and GCconnex, though they now have younger cousins) to Open Government to digital government. The history of these programs is told in parallel with the rise of social media in government, changing perceptions of the roles of public servants in a digital age, and the amorphous world of public sector innovation.

Another history of IT in Canadian government, Digital State at the Leading Edge, came out in 2007 and provides the earlier history on which Clarke’s book builds. It’s an excellent reference text but still fascinating because it provides a lens into both what has changed and what hasn’t. It provides perspective about the challenges that we’re facing – and in some cases, frustration that we’re still facing them. For instance, consider one of the recommendations of the 1996 Task Force on Horizontal Issues to bring “a team Government of Canada perspective into daily decision-making and direction” which is now echoed in the One Team Gov movement and its Canadian community. In that way, I think Opening the Government of Canada will provide the same value into the future.

Here’s another such example from the book: a former Clerk of the Privy Council observing in 1993 that “those who traditionally simply made decisions will have to spend much more of their time explaining situations, setting out the various options and trade-offs, and persuading those involved, before proposed solutions become acceptable.” This shift is still part of the Open Government conversation and visions into the changing roles of policy analysts. In 2017 the current Clerk of the Privy Council modernized the same themes: “We had an advantage, a monopoly, on capacity, on data, on modelling… no longer. Anyone with a smartphone is a policy analyst now. But we have analysis, synthesis, translation into decidable, implementable choices.”

Clarke provides historical context as well as theory and community context, which is where the value in the book lies. It’s easy to get caught up in ideas (the current Clerk, at the same event: “we have a tendency to overdramaticize innovation.”), and this book puts the leading edge in a long view with a critical eye. It’s very much so en vogue to talk about the age of disruption or the fourth industrial revolution and the limits of traditional governance. Discussing change with an appreciation and understanding for the benefits of traditions and structures is more rare and valuable, like Dale Smith did for the electoral reform debate in The Unbroken Machine. Clarke provides much food for thought on what sort of public service we want, and what sort of public servants we want to be. (I am, of course, a sucker for debate about [public servant anonymity](https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B7mkBn2gvclObU5FeXNEd1NIYWM).)

This pattern repeats throughout the book: for social media, widespread collaboration, digital services, and Open Government including platform government and citizen engagement.

Clarke’s closing section is titled “Digital era open government in Canada: unfinished project, uncertain future.” I’ll close off this review with some brief editorializing for the future of that project. In my view, the history, principles, and competing perspectives have greater and greater value in an era of change. In a slow-moving, static world, principles about good public service could be embedded in policy and process and represented to the public through a limit number of spokespersons. In a dynamic, fast-paced world with constantly changing contexts, the policies and processes can’t keep up. Only the principles can, which can then be applied to new situations, platforms, and questions. Dr. Clarke’s book is a simultaneously a signpost for where the public service is headed, but also serves as the trail from where it’s been.



*Some disclosure: I asked for a copy of this book with the intention of writing about it, largley because I always appreciate Dr. Clarke's contribution to Canadian public administration discourse.
